<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 19</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="h2herein">CHAPTER XIX.
<span class="hsmall">EXPERIENCE IN ST. GILES’S.</span></h2>
<div class="dsynopsis">
Deep-snow — Beggar in Belgravia wanted
work — He said he was a Watchmaker — Gave
his address — It was false — Met him
months after — The same story — The
same untruth — Children hired for the
purpose of Begging — Cellar in St.
Giles’s — Inquired for a Poor Woman and
Child — Landlady told me of a Man almost starving in
her back kitchen — He turned out to be an accomplished
Swindler — Pot-boys — Caught him at
last — Took him to Bow Street.</div>
<p class="pfirst"><span class="smcap">S<b>OON</b></span> after
taking up my residence in London, I met with many applications from
street-beggars, with various tales of distress. I could not imagine
that all these were fictitious, and found great difficulty in selecting
the few objects on whom I could bestow my very moderate means of
charity. One severe winter I resolved on making my own personal
ob­ser­va­tions on the most promising cases which presented themselves.</p>
<p>The first general principle at which I arrived was, <span class="nowrap">that—</span></p>
<p>In whatever part of London I might be, if I asked for the
residence of a mendicant, it was pretty sure to be in a
quarter very remote from the one in which he asked relief.</p>
<p>The next was, <span class="nowrap">that—</span></p>
<p>Those mendicants who professed to want work and not
charity, always belonged to trades in which it was scarcely
possible to give them employment without trusting them with
valuable property. <span class="xxpn" id="p243">{243}</span></p>
<p>One example will suffice. During a very severe winter,
the ground being covered with snow, whilst passing through
Belgrave Square, a man accosted me, declaring that he could
get no work, and that himself and family were starving.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈BEGGAR, A WATCHMAKER.〉</div>
<p>I inquired his trade: he was a watchmaker. I asked for
his address. I wrote down in my pocket-book his name, the
street, and the number, and read it to him: it was in Clerkenwell.
The next day I went there, made particular inquiries
of the landlord, and was informed that no person of that
name lodged in the house, or ever had lodged in it. I spoke
to several respectable female lodgers also, who gave me the
same information, as far as their knowledge went.</p>
<p>Several months after, I met the same pro­fes­sion­al mendicant
in Portland Road. He did not recollect me, and again
told the same story, and again gave me the same address.
On this, I recalled to his memory that I had seen him before:
that he had given me the same address; and that, having
myself been there to inquire, I had found that his story was
untrue. This statement had allowed him time to invent a
new tale.</p>
<p>With well-feigned surprise he suddenly remembered that
his wife, about three months ago, had told him that a strange
gentleman had called, and had par­tic­u­lar­ly inquired for him;
that his wife, knowing that a writ was out against him, and
that he was liable to be arrested, had denied that any person
of his name resided in the house.</p>
<p>A few days after I went again to Clerkenwell, and received
from the residents the answer they had given me three
months before. I then went to one of the large shops for
tools used by watchmakers near that locality, and having
mentioned the subject to the master, he very readily asked
amongst his shopmen whether they knew of
such a person. <span class="xxpn" id="p244">{244}</span></p>
<p>He assured me that, even allowing the man had not usually
dealt at his shop, it was impossible that he should not have
been several times there for some trifling article necessary in
the hurry of his business. I then went to two or three other
shops of a similar kind, and found that his name was entirely
unknown. I therefore concluded that he was an impostor.</p>
<p>I will mention one other case, because it arose entirely out
of an accident, and could not have been foreseen.</p>
<p>Living at that time much in society, I usually walked
home from the hot rooms of an evening party wrapped in a
stout cloak, even though it sometimes rained. On these
occasions I was often placed in a most painful situation.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈BEGGARS WITH CHILDREN.〉</div>
<p>A half-clad miserable female, with an infant in her arms,
and sometimes accompanied by another just able to walk,
followed me through a drizzling rain to ask charity for her
starving children.</p>
<p>I confess it was to me a most painful effort to resist such
an application; yet my better reason informed me that in all
probability these miserable children were hired for the purpose
of exciting the feelings of the charitable. To give
money to their heartless conductors could only be considered
charitable, inasmuch as it might contribute to shorten the
lives of their wretched victims.</p>
<p>I fear I gave wrongfully many a sixpence. I inquired into
some cases, but without any result which could enable me to
alter the opinion I have expressed. It was in one of these
inquiries that the singular case I am now about to relate
occurred.</p>
<p>In one of the densest of London fogs on a November night,
or rather at between one and two o’clock in the morning, I
was inquiring, in one of the most disreputable streets in
London—George Street, St. Giles’s, long
ago pulled down, <span class="xxpn" id="p245">{245}</span>
enlarged, and rebuilt—for a female with an infant, who had
represented herself to me as a miserable mother, and into
the truth of whose story I was anxious to inquire.</p>
<p>I had been into several of the lowest lodging-houses, and
into the cellars of that nest of misery and guilt, and was unsuccessful
in finding the object I sought.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈THE LANDLADY IN GEORGE STREET, ST. GILES’S.〉</div>
<p>Only a few of these abodes of wretchedness remained unvisited,
when I inquired after the poor woman I was seeking
of a somewhat decently clothed woman, who rented one of
them.</p>
<p>She was the weekly tenant of one of these houses, and told
me that on the preceding night a poor woman, with a child
wrapped up in a miserably torn shawl, had applied for a
lodging at about eleven o’clock. It was raining hard, and the
poor woman possessed only twopence, and the price of a bed
in the cellar was at this house threepence. The poor woman
went away, remarking that she must then go and pawn the
remnant of the shawl that covered her infant. She went, but
returned no more.</p>
<p>The ancient weekly tenant then thought it necessary to
defend, or rather to explain, her own apparently cruel conduct.
I told her that it was unnecessary, and that even in
my inmost thoughts I had not cast a reproach upon her. I
told her that, from my knowledge of the misery suffered by
poor people, I could readily imagine circumstances which
might fully explain her conduct.</p>
<p>Her heart, however, was too full, so I sat down and listened
to her tale. She was a widow advanced in years, having no
relatives, or even friends, to assist her in her old age. She
was the weekly tenant of a small house in that villanous
street, and was entirely supported by letting out every foot of
floor which could be made available for a
human being to <span class="xxpn" id="p246">{246}</span>
sleep upon. But the stern necessity which hung over her
with its iron hand was <span class="nowrap">this:—</span></p>
<p>Her weekly rent became due on each Monday, and if not
paid on that night, the next morning would see her inexorably
turned out of her only home, and deprived of her only means
of sustaining life.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈A STARVING MAN IN HER KITCHEN.〉</div>
<p>She was pleased at my attention to her sad tale, and, with
a little encouragement, mentioned some of the experience she
had had in her painful vocation.</p>
<p>“At this moment,” she said, “there is lying on a rug in the
back kitchen a young man, who has tasted nothing during the
last two days but water from the pump on the opposite side
of the street. He appears,” she said, “to have been in better
circumstances in other times.”</p>
<p>It was now two o’clock in the morning, in the midst of a
dense fog. I inquired whether it would be possible at this
hour to get some soup or meat, or anything to sustain life. I
went down into the close unventilated room, and beheld,
stretched on a kind of thing like a couple of sacks, a pale,
emaciated man, apparently about two or three and thirty
years of age. I desired him to call on me the next morning;
and, leaving my address with his landlady, left also a
small sum of money to procure for him, if possible, present
necessaries.</p>
<p>The next morning this half-starved man called at my
house, in garments scarcely covering him. I inquired into
his history, and he told me one probably as fabulous as that
with which he afterwards deluded me, during my own short
acquaintance with him.</p>
<p>I supplied him with a few clothes, shoes, and other things,
just to replace the worn-out rags in which I had found him,
and desired him in a day or two, when he got
them into a <span class="xxpn" id="p247">{247}</span>
serviceable form, to come to me, that I might see what his
capacity was, and by what means he could best earn a subsistence.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈AN ACCOMPLISHED ROGUE.〉</div>
<p>It is unnecessary to enter into the long and artful stories
he invented. The short result was this: that he had been a
steward of a merchant ship—had been in the West Indies,
and on other voyages; that having, on his return from some
voyage, been reduced by illness to spend all his little earnings,
and even to sell his clothes, and having no friends in
London, he could not go amongst the merchant captains for
want of decent clothes to appear in. This difficulty was
partially removed by my giving him a suit. He called one
day to tell me that he had succeeded in getting the situation
of steward in a small West Indiaman, and that he did not like
to sell or exchange a pair of top-boots which I had given him
without asking my permission, which, of course, I gave. He
told me that if he sold the boots, and purchased light, gaudy-coloured
waistcoating, he might do a little profitable business
with the niggers. He showed me the card of the shop in
Monmouth Street at which he had commenced a negotiation
about the sale of the boots, and another, in the same street,
at which he proposed to purchase the waistcoats. He gave
me the name of his ship, and of its captain, and the day of
sailing. I flattered myself that he was now in a fair position
to get a fresh start in life.</p>
<p>A few evenings after the ship was supposed to have sailed
he called at my house, in the midst of heavy rain, apparently
much agitated, and stated that, in raising their anchor, an
accident had happened, by which the captain’s leg had been
broken.</p>
<p>He also said that, being sent up with the ship’s boat to
fetch the new captain, he could not resist calling
at my house <span class="xxpn" id="p248">{248}</span>
once more to express all his gratitude. I confess I entertained
some suspicion about this story; but I said nothing.</p>
<p>The next morning I found that during his visit he had
extracted something more from my female servants, upon
whose sympathy he had worked, and who had previously
contributed very liberally to his wants.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈CONSULTATION AT BOW STREET.〉</div>
<p>I now went to search for him in his old haunts, and with
much difficulty ascertained that he had been living riotously
at some public-house in another quarter, and had been continually
drunk.</p>
<p>My next step was to go to Bow Street and consult Sir
Richard Birnie. Having explained the case, he consulted
several of his most skilful officers; but none were acquainted
with the man. Sir Richard remarked that he was a very
adroit fellow, and that it was doubtful whether he had actually
committed an act of swindling. I inquired what I should do
in case I found him. The magistrate replied, “Bring him
before me;” but he did not indicate the slightest expectation
of my accomplishing that object.</p>
<p>Having thanked Sir Richard, I withdrew, determined, if
the fellow were in London, I would catch him.</p>
<p>I now renewed my inquiries, which at first were ineffectual.
One day it occurred to me that, as he had shown me
two cards of shopkeepers in Monmouth Street, I might possibly,
by cautious inquiry, get some clue to his whereabouts.</p>
<p>Although it was Sunday when this idea occurred, I immediately
commenced at one end of the street to knock at each
door, apologize to the landlord or landlady, and, shortly
stating my case, to inquire if they could throw any light
upon the subject. I went up one side of the street, and
down part of the other, having at two places gained some
traces of the fellow. <span class="xxpn" id="p249">{249}</span></p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈MORNING VISIT TO ST. GILES’S.〉</div>
<p>I will say, to the credit of the then residents, some of
whom I intruded upon at their dinner hour, that I received
in no one instance the slightest incivility, nor even coldness.</p>
<p>The most important information I obtained was, that a
certain pot-boy (name and name of his public-house both
unknown) would probably be able to give me some clue.</p>
<p>I next took my station at the northern end of Monmouth
Street, and during three hours accosted every pot-boy who
passed. At last I got hold of the right one, and so ultimately
obtained the information I wanted.</p>
<p>The fellow was then arrested, and brought before Sir R.
Birnie. The magistrate was much surprised that so clever a
fellow should not have been known to any of his officers.
After a long examination, I stated to the magistrate, that
though I was very reluctant to appear before the public in
such a case, yet that if he thought it a public duty, I should
not shrink from it. Sir Richard remarked, that the inconvenience
of my attending two or three days to prosecute would
be very great—that the fellow was so accomplished an artist,
that it was very doubtful if he could be convicted. He then
added, that the best thing to be done for the man himself
would be, if I could produce any new evidence, that he
should be remanded for a week, to hear it, and then be discharged
with a caution from the bench.</p>
<p>As my servants could give additional evidence, the fellow
was remanded for a week, then duly lectured and discharged.</p>
<p>In the course of my efforts to inform myself of the real
wants of those around me, I profited much by the experience
of one or two friends, both most excellent and kind-hearted
men, whose official duties rendered them far more conversant
than myself with the subject. Mr. Walker and Mr. Broderip,
both of them magistrates, were amongst
my intimate friends. <span class="xxpn" id="p250">{250}</span>
Mr. Walker, the author of “The Original,” maintained that
no one ever was actually starved in London, except through
his own folly or fault.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈VALUABLE MAGISTRATES.〉</div>
<p>The result of my own experience leads me to recommend
all those who do not possess time and the requisite energies
for personal inquiries, to place the means they wish to devote
to charity in the hands of some sensible and kind-hearted
magistrate.</p>
<p>I have been present, in the course of my life, at many cases
brought before our London police magistrates. They possess
an immense power of doing good—a power of making the law
respected, not by its punishments, but by their own kindliness
of manner and thoughtful consideration for the feelings
of those brought into close contact with them.</p>
<p>Plain common sense, a kind heart, and, above all, the feelings of
a thorough gentleman, are invaluable qualities in a magistrate. They
give dignity to the court over which he presides, as well as an example
which will be insensibly followed by all its officers. I have seen
cases from which my own avocations have imperatively called me away,
when I would gladly have remained to admire the kindness and the tact
with which entangled questions have been gradually brought to a humane
and just conclusion.</p></div></section></body></html>
