<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII: Scene from a New Afterpiece, Called “Politics and Poetry;” or, “The Decline of Science”</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Scene from a New Afterpiece, Called “Politics and Poetry;” or, “The Decline of Science”</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-22-dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Dramatis Personæ</h3>
				<p>
					<b>People of fashion:⁠—</b>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b>, a retired Philosopher, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.P.</abbr> for Shoreditch.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</b>, a Tory nobleman of ancient family.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess of Flumm</b>, his wife.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Selina</b>, their daughter.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr>Hon. Mrs.</abbr> Fubsey</b>, sister of the Countess.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>
					<b>Whigs:⁠—</b>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></b>, Prime Minister.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</b>, First Lord of the Admiralty.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</b>, Secretary at War.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</b>, Secretary for the Colonies; also <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.P.</abbr> for Shoreditch.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p><b>Tories</b> (Members of the Conservative Club):⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord George</b>,</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</b>,</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marquis of Flamborough</b>,</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Dick Trim</b>, a former Whipper-in,</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>
					<b>Shoreditch electors:⁠—</b>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Highway</b>, a Radical.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Griskin</b>, Colonel of the Lumber Troop.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</b>, his Lieutenant.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>
					<b>Philosophers:⁠—</b>
				</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Orlando Windfall</b>, <abbr>Knt.</abbr> <abbr>R.</abbr> <abbr>Han.</abbr> <abbr>Guelph.</abbr> Order, an Astronomical Observer.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir Simon Smugg</b>, <abbr>Knt.</abbr> <abbr>R.</abbr> <abbr>Han.</abbr> <abbr>Guelph.</abbr> Order, Professor of Botanism.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Atall</b>, an Episcopizing Mathematician, Dean of Canterbury.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</b>, a Calculating Officer.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Other Lords⁠—Conservative and Whig.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The Scene is laid in London; principally at the West-end of the Town.</p>
				<p>The time is near the end of May, 1835.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-22-scenes-etc-extracted" epub:type="z3998:drama">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Scenes, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, Extracted</h3>
				<section id="chapter-22-act-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h4>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
						</h5>
						<p>Committee-room of the Conservatives, Charles-street; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Marquis of Flamborough</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord George</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</b>; other Tory Lords, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</b>. A table covered with papers; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</b> smoking a cigar; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord George</b> half asleep in an armchair; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</b> busy in looking over a list of the House of Commons.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>It will be a devilish close run I see!⁠—yet I think we might manage some of them <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pause.</i> Does anybody know <em>Turnstile</em>?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marquis</td>
									<td>
										<p>Never heard of him!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord George</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mumbling.</i> The reform Member for Puddledock, isn’t he?⁠—the author of a book on Pinmaking, and things of that kind. An ironmonger in Newgate-street!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>No, no! Member for Shoreditch;⁠—with Smooth, the Colonial Secretary!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking the cigar from his mouth.</i> I think I’ve heard something of him at Cambridge: he was Newtonian Professor of Chemistry when I was at College.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>Can’t we talk him over?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</td>
									<td>
										<p>No, no! he is too sharp for that.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>Will anybody speak to him?⁠—and if he won’t vote with us, keep him out of the way.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Marquis</td>
									<td>
										<p>Perhaps a hint at an appointment!⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Charles</td>
									<td>
										<p>Nor that either; he is a fellow of some spirit; and devilish proud.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>But what are his tastes?⁠—how does he employ himself?⁠—who are his friends?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>Why he’s⁠—a sort of a⁠—philosopher⁠—that wants to be a man of the world!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Oh!⁠—now I begin to recollect;⁠—I must have seen him at Sir Phillip’s. Leave him to me;⁠—I think Lady Flumm and my daughter can manage to keep him quiet on Thursday night.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Trim</td>
									<td>
										<p>But for Tuesday⁠—my Lord?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Two nights!⁠—Then I must try what I can do for you, myself.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
						</h5>
						<p>Grosvenor-square.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b>, musing.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>This will never do! They make use of me, and laugh at me in their sleeves;⁠—push me round and go by. That break down <em>was</em> a devil of a business! They didn’t laugh out to be sure; but they coughed and looked unutterably!! And where is this to end? What shall I have to show for it? Confounded loss of time;⁠—to hear those fellows prosing, instead of seeing the occultation last night. And that book of Ls.’; so much that <em>I</em> had begun upon⁠—and might have finished! It never will do! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rousing himself after a pause.</i> But knowledge, after all, <em>is</em> power! That at least is certain⁠—power⁠—to do what? to refuse Lord Doodle’s invitation; and to ask Lord Humbug for a favour, which it is ten to one he will refuse! But the Royal Society is defunct! That I <em>have</em> accomplished. Gilbert, and the Duke! and the Secretaries! I have driven them all before me!⁠—and, now, though <em>I</em> must not be a knight of the Guelphic order, (yet a riband is a pretty looking thing! and a star too!⁠—) I will show that I can teach <em>them</em> how to make knights; and describe the decorations that other men are to wear. But here comes Lord Flumm, and I am saved the bore of calling upon him.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
						</h5>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</b>.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile, if I do not mistake! My dear Turnstile: how glad I am to see you again! it <em>was</em> kind of Sir Phillip to introduce me. You know that you are near our house; and Lady Flumm will be so happy⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>In truth, my Lord, I was about to call upon you. After what you were so good as to say last night, I took the first opportunity.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Well, that <em>is</em> kind. But you did not speak last night. How came that? I don’t find you in the paper, yet the subject was quite your own. Tallow and bar-iron, raw materials and machinery. Ah, my dear sir! when science condescends to come among us mortals, the effects to be expected <em>are</em> wonderful indeed!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>My Lord, you flatter. But we have reached your door. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> [Confound him!⁠—But I am glad he was not in the house. It’s clear he hasn’t heard of the break down.]</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>While I have you to myself, Turnstile, remember that you dine with me on Tuesday. I am to have two friends, Lord S⁠⸺ and Sir George Y⁠⸺, who wish very much to be acquainted with you. Half-past seven.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>You are very good, my lord. I dare not refuse so kind an invitation.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
						</h5>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm’s</b> drawing-room. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</b> at the writing-table. <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fubsey</b> at work on a sofa.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b>.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Lady Flumm, this is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile, whom you have so long wished to know. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile⁠—Lady Flumm.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p><em>The</em> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile. My dear sir, I am too happy to see you. We had just been speaking of your delightful book. Selina! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Calling.</i> <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Selina</b>.</i> This is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Selina</td>
									<td>
										<p>Indeed!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Yes, indeed! You see he is a mortal man after all. Bring me, my love, the book you will find open on the table in the boudoir. I wish to show <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile the passages I have marked this morning.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Selina</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Returning with the book, and running over the leaves.</i> “Lace made by caterpillars.”⁠—“Steam-engines with fairy fingers.”⁠—“Robe of nature.”⁠—“Sun of science.”⁠—“Faltering worshipper.”⁠—“Altar of truth.” It <em>is, indeed</em>, delightful! The taste, the poetical imagination, are surprising. I hope, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile⁠—indeed I am sure, that you love music?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Not <em>very</em> particularly, I must acknowledge <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">smiling</i>; a barrel-organ is the instrument most in my way.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling.</i> Music and machinery, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile. Polite literature and mathematics. You <em>do</em> know how to combine. Others must judge of the profounder parts of your works; but the style, and the fancy, are what I should most admire.⁠—You dine with Lord Flumm, he tells me, on Tuesday. Now you <em>must</em> come to <em>me</em> on Thursday night.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>I am sorry to say, that, on recollection, I <em>ought</em> to have apologized to Lord Flumm. The Pottery Question stands for Tuesday; and I should be there, as one of the Committee; and Thursday, your Ladyship knows, is the second reading of the Place and Pension Bill.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Oh, we are Staffordshire people! <em>that</em> will excuse you to the pottery folks; and, for Thursday, I <em>will</em> absolutely take no excuse. We have Pasta and Donzelli! perhaps a quadrille afterwards⁠—(you dance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile?)⁠—and Lady Sophia C⁠⸺ and her cousin, Lord F⁠⸺, have said <em>so much</em> about those beautiful passages at the end of your book, that they will be quite disappointed if I do not keep my promise to introduce them. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Touching his arm with her finger.</i></p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Your Ladyship knows how to conquer: I feel that I <em>cannot</em> refuse.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-7" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
						</h5>
						<p>Grosvenor-square; before <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm’s</b> house.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b>, from the house.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>This is all very delightful; but what will they say at Shoreditch?⁠—twice in one week absent from the House, and at two Tory parties.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Griskin</b>, hastily, heated; his hat in his left hand; a pocket-handkerchief in his right.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Griskin</td>
									<td>
										<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile, I’m glad to find you; just called on you, as I came to this quarter to look after a customer⁠—long way from the City⁠—sorry not to hear from you.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Why, really, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Griskin, I am very sorry; but I am not acquainted with the Commander-in-chief. And I must say that I should not know how to press for the contract, knowing that your nephew’s prices are thirty percent, at least, above the market.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Griskin</td>
									<td>
										<p>That’s being rather nice, I should say, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile. My nephew is as good a lad as ever stood in shoe-leather; and has six good wotes in Shoreditch⁠—and, as to myself, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile, I must say that, after all I did at your election⁠—and in such wery hot weather⁠—I did not expect you’d be so wery particular about a small matter.⁠—Sir, I wish you a good morning.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bowing and looking after him.</i> So this fellow, like the rest of them, thinks that I am to do his jobs, and to neglect my own. And this is your <em>reformed</em> Parliament.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-9" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
						</h5>
						<p>The street, near <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile’s</b> house.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</b>, meeting.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Taking both <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes’</b> hands.</i> My dear Tripes, how d’ye do?⁠—Pray, how is your good lady?⁠—What a jolly party at your house last night! and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tripes, I hope, is none the worse for it?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>Oh dear sir, no! <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tripes and my daughters were <em>so</em> pleased with your Scotch singing.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>And your boys, how are they?⁠—fine, promising, active fellows.⁠—You’ve heard from MacLeech?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>Just received the note as I left home.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>All is quite right, you see, your cousin has the appointment at the Cape. I knew MacLeech was just the man for the details. A ship, I find, is to sail in about three weeks; and <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">significantly</i> I don’t think your cousin need be <em>very</em> scrupulous about freight and passage.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>You are too good, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smooth. I’m sure if anything that I can do⁠—my sense of all your kindness⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>I was thinking, when I saw those fine lads of yours, that another assistant to my under secretary’s deputy⁠—but (between you and me) Hume thinks that one is more than enough. We must wait a little.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Takes <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes’</b> arm. Exeunt.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-10" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
						</h5>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile’s</b> parlour, 11½ <abbr class="eoc">a.m.</abbr> Breakfast on the table; pamphlets and newspapers. In the corners of the room, books and philosophical instruments, dusty and thrown together; heaps of Parliamentary Reports lying above them. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b> alone, musing, and looking over some journals.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>This headache! Impossible to sleep when one goes to bed by daylight. Experiments by Arago! Ah! a paper by Cauchy, on my own subject. But here is this cursed committee in Smithfield to be attended; and it is already past eleven. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i></p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Knock at the hall door.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
									<td>
										<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tripes, sir.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Show him in. He comes, no doubt, to say that my election is arranged. A good, fatheaded, honest fellow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</b>.</i> Well <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tripes, I’m glad to see you. Pray take a chair.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>We hoped to have seen you at the meeting yesterday, sir. Capital speech from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smooth. You know, of course, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Highway is a candidate; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> MacLeech is talked of;⁠—very sorry, indeed, you weren’t there.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>A transit of Venus, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tripes, is a thing that does not happen every day. Besides, my friend, Stellini from Palermo, is here; and I had promised to go with him to Greenwich.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>Almost a pity, sir, to call off your attention from such objects. But in the City we are men of business, you know⁠—plain, everyday people.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>It was unlucky; but I could not help it. The committee, I hope, is by this time at work?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>It was just that, I called about. I wished to tell you myself how very sorry I am that I cannot be your chairman. But⁠—my large family⁠—press of business⁠—in short⁠—you must excuse me;⁠—and, if I should be upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smooth’s committee, I don’t well see how I can attend to both.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Smooth!⁠—but he and I go together, you know⁠—at least, I understood it so.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>I’m glad to hear it; I feared there might be some mistake. And, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> MacLeech comes forward⁠—being a fellow-townsman of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smooth, and a good deal in the Glasgow interest;⁠—a commercial man too, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile;⁠—a <em>practical</em> man⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile;⁠—I am not quite sure that you can count upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smooth’s assistance;⁠—and Government, you know, is strong.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Assistance, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tripes⁠—from Smooth!⁠—why I came in on my own ground;⁠—on the <em>Independent</em> interest.⁠—Assistance from Smooth!⁠—Besides⁠—Smooth knows very well that <em>our</em> second votes secured him.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p>Very true, sir; but these Independent people are hard to deal with; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Highway, I assure you, hit very hard in his speech at the meeting yesterday. He talked of amateur politicians⁠—attention to the business of the people⁠—dinners with the opposite party. In short, I fear, they will say⁠—like the others⁠—that what they want is something of “a <em>practical man</em>” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile.⁠—I’m sorry that I must be going.⁠—Sir, your servant.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising and ringing. Enter servant.</i> Open the door for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tripes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</b>.</i> D⁠⸺⁠d, double-faced, selfish blockhead!</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-1-scene-11" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
						</h5>
						<p>The street, as before.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</b>, from <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile’s</b> house.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Tripes</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Putting on his hat.</i> He might have been more civil, too;⁠—though he did count upon me for his chairman. But I’ll show him that I’m not to be insulted; and if, MacLeech manages the matter well for Charles, this <em><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Philosopher Turnstile</em>, though he thinks himself so clever, may go to the devil.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-22-act-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
					<h4>
						<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h4>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-2-scene-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
						</h5>
						<p>Downing-street, after a Cabinet Meeting. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</b>; and other Members of the Cabinet.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></td>
									<td>
										<p>That point being settled, gentlemen, the sooner you are at your posts the better. The King comes down to dissolve on Friday.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> But, before we part, we had better decide about this Presidency of the Board of Manufactures. The appointment requires an able man; of <em>rather</em> peculiar attainments. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile has been mentioned to me; and his claims I am told, are strong:⁠—long devotion to science⁠—great expense and loss of time for public objects⁠—high reputation, and weight of opinion, as a man of science.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>I believe that he has left <em>science</em>; at least, he wishes it to be so considered. He is my colleague at Shoreditch; and, of course, I wish to support him;⁠—but⁠—when business is to be done;⁠—and men⁠—and things, to be brought together⁠—I own⁠—I <em>doubt</em>⁠—whether a more practical man⁠—might not⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</td>
									<td>
										<p>And <em>that</em> poor Turnstile certainly is not. He must always have <em>a reason</em>;⁠—nothing but the <i xml:lang="la">quod erat demonstrandum</i>; a romancer; if you have anything to do, his first object is <em>to do it well</em>. I am quite sure he will not answer our purpose.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</td>
									<td>
										<p>He talks too much about consistency; and on party questions, you are never sure of him: last week he did not divide with us, on either night.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></td>
									<td>
										<p>Well; <em>I</em> am quite indifferent. I did hear of his being at Lord Flumm’s; and after what had just passed in the Lords, a personal friend of mine would, perhaps, have kept away from that quarter. Is there no other person?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hesitatingly.</i> Davies Gilbert.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughing.</i> Pooh! Pooh! Poor Gilbert! No, that will never do.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>Or⁠—Warburton?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sneering.</i> Worse and worse!⁠—if <em>ever</em> there was an impracticable⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</td>
									<td>
										<p>But we don’t know that Turnstile is sure of his seat. Smooth, hasn’t MacLeech been talked of for Shoreditch?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>He’s <em>certain</em> of succeeding! The independent gentlemen don’t quite like Turnstile⁠—they wish for Highway⁠—and the split will foil them both. MacLeech⁠—now that he has been mentioned⁠—I must acknowledge, does seem to me to be the <em>very</em> man for the manufactures⁠—a practical, persevering man of business⁠—never absent from the House⁠—excellent Scotch connections⁠—a cousin of the Duke of <abbr>Y.</abbr>’s⁠—.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></td>
									<td>
										<p>That is a good point, certainly. An appointment given there would be candid and liberal;⁠—it might conciliate⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</td>
									<td>
										<p>A very civil, excellent fellow, too. MacLeech, <em>I</em> should say, is the man.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Shift</td>
									<td>
										<p>I quite agree with you.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>I confess, I think he will fill the office well. And if it is thought quite necessary that Hume’s motion to reduce the salary⁠—though it is not large⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Closewind</td>
									<td>
										<p>Oh, no! The salary had better remain;⁠—£2,000 is not too much. Besides, the <em>principle</em> of giving way is bad.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></td>
									<td>
										<p>Well, gentlemen, let it be so. Smooth, you will let MacLeech know that he has the office.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>And at the present salary?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr></td>
									<td>
										<p>Agreed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-2-scene-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
						</h5>
						<p>The Athenæum Club. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Atall</b> at a table.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>I saw it this morning on the breakfast-table at Lord <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr>’s; it is an admirable article, and I was told is yours.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Atall</td>
									<td>
										<p><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Decliningly.</i> These things, you know, are always supposed to be anonymous. But I am not sorry that you liked the paper. Did his lordship speak of it?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>The book was open at the article upon the table. It does you honour. Hits <em>just</em> the happy point⁠—hints probable <em>intentions</em>, without giving any pledge⁠—enough to please the Liberals⁠—and full room for <em>explanation</em>, if any change becomes expedient. The true plan, believe me, for a ministry, in times like these, is to proceed <i xml:lang="fr">en tâtonnant</i>.⁠—Pray, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dean, how is the Bishop of Hereford?</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Atall</td>
									<td>
										<p>I didn’t know that he was particularly ill. He has long been feeble.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>These complainers do sometimes hold out. But they cannot last forever.⁠—We meet I hope tomorrow at the levee. You <em>ought</em> to be there.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Atall</td>
									<td>
										<p>I have come to town for the purpose; having secured, I think, Closewind’s election at Cambridge.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Smooth</td>
									<td>
										<p>Well done, my very good friend! Men of talent should always pull together. Sorry that I must go; but we meet tomorrow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shaking hands very cordially. Exit.</i></p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-2-scene-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
						</h5>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways’</b> lodgings. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</b> alone, writing.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b>.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>My dear Byeways; I want your assistance. Deserted by those shabby dogs the Radicals, and tricked, I fear, by the Whigs, I find I have no chance of a decent show of numbers at the next election, if my scientific friends do not support me with spirit. Even so, it <em>can</em> be only an honourable retreat. I count upon <em>you</em>⁠—you understand the world;⁠—and as soon as we can muster a committee, you must be my chairman.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</td>
									<td>
										<p>My good friend, don’t be in a hurry; sit down and tell me all about it. I know you don’t care much about your seat⁠—and after all⁠—it is⁠—to you, a waste of time;⁠—but, with the Independents at your back, you are secure. As to me, my dear fellow, you know that I am⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>But man! the Independents, as you call them, have taken up Highway; he blusters, and goes any length.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</td>
									<td>
										<p>But Smooth, you know, is strong in Shoreditch⁠—Government interest⁠—you brought him in last time; and you and he, together⁠—</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>I know it; but he says he is not <em>strong enough</em> to run any risk. If you will be my chairman, with a good committee, we may at least die game.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</td>
									<td>
										<p>My dear Turnstile, you know how glad I always am to serve you⁠—and you know what <em>I think</em>;⁠—but in my situation, my dear fellow, it is quite impossible that I can <em>oppose</em> the ministers. MacLeech too, they say, is a candidate; and his brother-in-law’s uncle was very civil, last year, in Scotland, to my wife’s cousin.⁠—But I <em>have</em> a plan for you. There is Atall, just come to town; make <em>him</em> your chief, and bring the Cambridge men together. The clergy were always strong in Shoreditch. Atall can speak to them.⁠—I am obliged to go to the War Office.⁠—And you had better lose no time in seeing Atall. Sorry to bid you goodbye. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</td>
									<td>
										<p>Well, this <em>is</em> strange! yet I thought I might have counted upon Byeways.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-2-scene-8" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
						</h5>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm’s</b> Drawing-room. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Selina</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr>Hon. Mrs.</abbr> Fubsey</b>.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fubsey</td>
									<td>
										<p>But, my dear sister; how <em>can</em> you so beflatter that poor man? You don’t know all the mischief you may do to him.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>“Poor man!” I cannot pity him. His maxim is, that knowledge is power; and he thinks <em>his</em> knowledge is all that can be known. He has to learn that <em>our</em> knowledge, also, is power; and that we know how to use it too.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</b>.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lord Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>There, Lady Selina, so much for your philosophic friend. Poor Turnstile! What a business he <em>has</em> made of it. Here is the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>, with the report of the Shoreditch election meeting. Turnstile has no chance. The Scotchmen coalesce; Highway none of us can think of; and Smooth and MacLeech walk over the ground in triumph; and then, the Presidency of Manufactures, the <em>very</em> appointment for which poor Turnstile was fitted (and, to do the poor devil justice, he could have filled it well), is given to MacLeech, a Scotch hanger on, or distant cousin of Smooth’s, and with the old salary, in spite of all that Hume could say against it.⁠—Bravo! Reform, and the Whigs forever!⁠—We Tories could not have done the business in a better style.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td/>
									<td>
										<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a Footman.</i>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Footman</td>
									<td>
										<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile, my Lady, sends up his card.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lady Flumm</td>
									<td>
										<p>Oh, not at home! And Sleek, put a memorandum in the visiting-book, that we are “out of town,” whenever <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turnstile calls.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
					<section id="chapter-22-act-2-scene-12" epub:type="z3998:scene">
						<h5>
							<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
							<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
						</h5>
						<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile’s</b> Parlour. Night. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile</b> alone.</p>
						<table>
							<tbody>
								<tr>
									<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Turnstile.</td>
									<td>
										<p>Then all is up. What a fool have I been to embark upon this sea of trouble! Two years of trifling and lost time; while others have been making discoveries and adding to their reputation. Those <em>rascal</em> Whigs, my blood boils to think of them. I can forgive the Shoreditch people⁠—the greasy, vulgar, money-getting beasts;⁠—but my friends, the men of principle⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Getting up and walking about.</i></p>
										<p>Is it still too late to return? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking round upon his books and instruments.</i> There you are, my old friends, whom I <em>have</em> treated rather ungratefully. What a scene at that cursed meeting! Highway’s bullying; and the baseness of Smooth; the sleek, sly, steering of that knave MacLeech; and yet they <em>must</em> succeed. There’s no help for it. I <em>am</em> fairly beaten⁠—thrown overboard, with not a leg to stand upon; and all I have to do is to go to bed now, to sleep off this fever; and tomorrow, take leave of politics, and try to be myself once more.</p>
									</td>
								</tr>
							</tbody>
						</table>
					</section>
				</section>
				<footer>
					<p>
						<b>End of the extracts.</b>
					</p>
					<p><em>Note.</em>⁠—The reader will doubtlessly have already discovered that <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Byeways</b>, with the other <i xml:lang="la">dramatis personæ</i> of this squib, are living characters not unknown in fashionable and political circles. In a future edition, if it can be done without offence, I may perhaps be induced to present them to the public without their masks and buskins.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
