<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 17</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">

<h2 class="h2herein">CHAPTER XVII.
<span class="hsmall">EXPERIENCE AMONGST WORKMEN.</span></h2>
<p epub:type="bridgehead">
Visit to Bradford — Clubs — Co-operative
Shops — The Author of the “Economy of
Man­u­fac­tures” welcomed by the Workmen — Visit
to the Temple of Eolus — The Phi­los­o­pher
moralises — Commiserates the unsuccessful
Statesman — Points to the Poet a Theme for his
Verse — Immortalises both.</p>
<p class="pfirst"><span class="smcap">D<b>URING</b></span> one of my
visits to Leeds, combinations and trades-unions were very prevalent.
A medical friend of mine, who was going to Bradford on a pro­fes­sion­al
visit, very kindly offered to take me over in his carriage and bring
me back again in the evening. He had in that town a friend engaged in
the manufactories of the place, to whom he proposed to introduce me,
and who would willingly give me every assistance. Unfortunately, on our
arrival we found that this gentleman was absent on a tour.</p>
<p>My medical friend was much vexed; but I assured him
that I was never at a loss in a manufacturing town, and we
agreed to meet at our hotel for dinner. I then went into
the town to pick up what information I might be able to
meet with.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈INTELLIGENT OPERATIVE.〉</div>
<p>Passing a small manufactory, I think it was of door-mats, I
inquired whether a stranger might be permitted to see it. The
answer being in the affirmative, one of the men accompanied
me round the works. Of course I asked him many questions
which he answered as far as he could; but
several of them <span class="xxpn" id="p229">{229}</span>
puzzled him, and he very good-humouredly tried to supply
the information I wanted by asking several of his fellow-workmen.
One question about which I was anxious to be informed,
puzzled them all. At last one of the men to whom
he applied said, “Why don’t you go and ask Sam Brown?”
My guide immediately went in search of his learned friend,
who gave me full information on the subjects of my inquiry.</p>
<p>Much pleased by the intelligence and acuteness of this
man, I thought it possible he might have read the “Economy
of Man­u­fac­tures.” On mentioning that work, I found he was
well acquainted with it, and he asked my opinion of its
merits. I told him that, having myself written the book,
I was not an impartial judge. On hearing that I was
its author, his delight was unbounded; he held out his
brawny hand, which I cordially grasped. The most gratifying
remark to me, however, amongst the many things in it to
which he referred with approbation, was the expression he
applied to it as a whole. “Sir,” said my new friend, “that
book made me think.” To make a man think for himself
is doing him far higher service than giving him much in­struc­tion.</p>
<p>I now told my new friend that I had studied a little the
effects of combinations, and also the results of co-operative
shops, and that I was very anxious to add to my stock of
information upon both subjects, but par­tic­u­lar­ly on the latter.
Knowing that there existed a co-operative shop in Bradford,
I asked whether it would be possible to see it and make some
inquiries as to its state and prospects. He said if he could
get permission for half an hour’s absence he would accompany
me to it, and give me whatever information I wished as to its
operation.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈CO-OPERATIVE SHOPS.〉</div>
<p>Mr. Brown accordingly accompanied
me to the <span class="xxpn" id="p230">{230}</span>
co-operative shop, where the information required was most readily
given.</p>
<p>As we were returning, my companion exclaimed, “Oh, how
lucky! there is ——, the secretary of all our clubs. He is
the man to tell you all about them.” We accordingly crossed
over to the other side: the secretary, as soon as he heard
my name, held out his hand and greeted me with a hearty
grasp.</p>
<p>Having told him the objects of my inquiry, he expressed
great anxiety to give me the fullest information. He proposed
to take me with him in the course of the evening to all
the clubs in Bradford, in each of which he promised me that
I should receive a most cordial welcome.</p>
<p>He offered to show me all their rules, with the exception
of certain ones which he assured me had no connection whatever
with the objects of my inquiries, and which the laws of
the respective clubs required to be kept secret. I think it
right to mention this fact; but I am bound also to add that
I have a strong conviction of the truth and sincerity of my
informant. I believe that the one or two rules which I understood
could not be communicated to a stranger, were merely
secret modes of recognition amongst the members of the different
societies by which fellow-members of the same societies
might recognize each other in distant places.</p>
<p>However, my limited time was now drawing to a close. It
was impossible to remain at Bradford that night, and my
previous arrangements called me in two days to a distant part
of the country. I parted with regret from these friendly
workmen, and joining my companion at the hotel, after a
hasty dinner we were soon on our way back to Leeds.</p>
<p>Our conversation turned upon the large ironworks we
should pass on our return, which
indeed were clearly <span class="xxpn" id="p231">{231}</span>
indicated by the columns of fire in front of us—tall chimneys
illumining the darkness of the night.</p>
<p>I was told by my friend that in one of the ironworks which
we should pass, there was a large tunnel through a rock which
had originally been intended for a canal: but that it was now
used as an air-chamber, to equalize the supply of the blast
furnaces. Also that an engine of a hundred horse-power
continually blew air into this stony chamber.</p>
<p>I inquired whether it would be possible to get admission
into this Temple of Æolus. As my friend, fortunately for me,
was acquainted with the proprietors, this was not difficult.
Our carriage drove up to the manager’s house, and my wish
was immediately gratified.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈A REVERIE.〉</div>
<p>A lantern was provided, a small iron door at the end of
the cavern was opened, and armed like Diogenes, I entered
upon <i>my</i> search after truth. I soon ascertained that there
was very little current, except close to the tuyeres which supplied
the several furnaces, and also at the aperture through
which tons of air were driven without cessation by the untiring
fiery horse.</p>
<p>I tried to think seriously; and reflecting on Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego, I speculated whether their furnace
might have been hotter than the one before me. I was within
a foot or two of a white heat, but I had no thermometer with
me, and if I had had one, its graduations might not have
been upon the same scale as theirs—so I gave up the
speculation.</p>
<p>The intensity of that fire was peculiarly impressive. It
recalled the past, disturbed the present, and suggested the
future. The contemplation of the fiery abyss, which had
recalled the history of those ancient Hebrews, naturally
turned my attention to the wonderful
powers of endurance <span class="xxpn" id="p232">{232}</span>
manifested by one of their modern rep­re­sen­ta­tives. Candour
obliges me to admit that my speculations on the future were
not entirely devoid of anxiety, though I trust they were
orthodox, for whilst I admired the humanity of Origen, I was
shocked by the heresy of Maurice.</p>
<p>I now began to moralize.</p>
<div class="dsdnote">〈EFFECT OF A DRAFT ON CONTEMPLATION.〉</div>
<p>Blown upon by a hundred horse-power, I sympathised
with Disraeli refrigerated by his <i>friends</i>. Turning from that
painful contemplation, I was calmed by the freshness of the
breeze. The action of the pumps, the <i>cool</i>ness of the place
and of the time, for it was <i>evening</i>, recalled to my recollection
M....... M.....; so I hoped, for the sake of in­struc­tion,
that he would in his own adamantine verses snatch if
possible from oblivion the moral anatomy of that unsuccessful
statesman. Yet, lest even the poet himself should be forgotten,
I resolved to give each of them his last chance of
celebrity preserved in the modest amber of my own simple
prose.</p>
<p>Emerging from my reverie, I made the preconcerted
signal; the iron door was opened, and we were again on our
road to Leeds.</p></div></section></body></html>
