<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the remains of human art, mixed with the bones of extinct races of animals. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Society</i>, 26th May, 1859. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There exists an aristocracy even amongst slates, perhaps from their occupying the most <em>elevated</em> position in every house. Small ones are called Ladies, a larger size Countesses, and the biggest of all are Duchesses. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards Captain Marryat. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir Edward Ffrench Bromhead, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, the author of an interesting paper in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Transactions of the Royal Society</i>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The only son of Madame D’Arblay. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Now the Right Honourable Sir Edward Ryan. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev. Dr.</abbr> Robinson, Master of the Temple. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A younger brother of the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Justice Maule. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leibnitz indicated fluxions by a <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">d</i>, Newton by a dot. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards Lord Wenlock. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This professorship is not in the gift of the Government. The electors are the masters of the various colleges. It was founded in 1663 by Henry Lucas, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.P.</abbr> for the University, and was endowed by him with a small estate in Bedfordshire. During my tenure of that office my net receipts were between £80 and £90 a year. I am glad to find that the estate is now improved, and that the University have added an annual salary to the Chair of Newton. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Edinburgh Review</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">cxx</span>, July, 1834. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The most remarkable instance I ever met with of the distinctness with which any individual perceived the exact boundary of his own knowledge, was that of the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wollaston. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Nature and Notable Use of the Most Simple Trigonal Numbers</i>. By <abbr epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">E.</abbr> De Joncourt, at the Hague. 1762. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parliamentary Paper, <abbr>No.</abbr> 370, printed 22nd May, 1823. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards Lord Goderich, now Earl of Ripon. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It will be convenient to distinguish between⁠—</p>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<p>The small <em>Model</em> of the original or Difference Engine.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>The <em>Difference</em> Engine itself, belonging to the Government, a part only of which has been put together.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>The designs for another <em>Engine</em>, which in this Statement is called the Analytical Engine.</p>
						</li>
					</ol>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#letter-to-sir-humphry-davy">letter to Sir Humphry Davy</a>. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The difference between this sum and £6,697 12<abbr>s.</abbr> mentioned earlier, seems to have arisen from the fact of the former sum having included the estimated amount of a bill which, when received, was found to be less than had been anticipated. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The present Lord Monteagle. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#statement-to-duke-of-wellington">statement to the Duke of Wellington</a>. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#royal-society-reference">the proposed reference to the Royal Society</a>. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The part of the <em>Difference</em> Engine already constructed, together with all the Drawings relating to the whole machine, were, in January, 1843 (by the direction of the Government), deposited in the Museum of King’s College, London. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It discovers the roots of equations by feeling whether all the figures in a certain column are <em>zeros</em>. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It may be necessary to explain to the unmathematical reader and to the ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer that <em>impossible quantities</em> in algebra are something like <em>mare’s-nests</em> in ordinary life. <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ada Augusta, Countess of Lovelace, only child of the Poet Byron. <a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Discourse of the President on Delivering the First Gold Medal of the Astronomical Society to Charles Babbage, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></span>,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Memoirs of the Astronomical Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 509. <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An illustration fell under my notice a few days after this paragraph was printed. A <em>new</em> work on Geometrical Drawing, commissioned by the Committee of Council on Education, was published by Professor Bradley. I have not been able to find in it a single word concerning “Mechanical Notation,” not even the very simplest portion of that science, namely, the Art of Lettering Drawings. It would seem impossible that any <em>Professor</em> of so limited a subject could be ignorant of the existence of such an important addition to its powers. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One object of the mission of Professor Bolzani was, to take back with him to Russia such an account of the Mechanical Notation as might facilitate its teaching in the Russian Universities. I regret that it was entirely out of my power to assist him. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of British Association at Glasgow</i>, 1855, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203; also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>, 1856. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i>, 19 <abbr>Jan.</abbr>, 1863, and elsewhere. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>About the 20th of May, 1863. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the purpose of testing the steadiness and truth of the tools employed in forming the gunmetal plates, I had some dozen of them turned with a diamond point. The perfect equality of its cut caused the reflected light to be resolved into those beautiful images pointed out by Frauenhofer, and also so much admired in the celebrated gold buttons produced by the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barton, the Comptroller of the Mint. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have since learnt, with real satisfaction, that my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbairn, was <em>not</em> a member of that incompetent Commission. <a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Exposition of 1852</i>; 2nd edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 222. <a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decline of Science in England</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 105. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1830. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I am not quite certain that the number was four; but I am absolutely certain that it was either four or six. <a href="chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late Sir John <abbr epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">J.</abbr> Guest, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An ancestor of mine, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burthogge, a great friend of John Locke, wrote, I regret to say it, a book to prove the eternity of torments; so I felt it a kind of hereditary duty to give him a lift. The arguments, such as they are, of my wealthy and therefore revered ancestor are contained in a work whose title is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><i xml:lang="la">Causa Dei</i>; or, an Apology for God</i>, wherein the perpetuity of infernal torments is evinced, and Divine justice (that notwithstanding) defended. By Richard Burthogge, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.D.</abbr> London: Imprinted at the Three Daggers, Fleet Street, 1675.</p>
					<p>The learned Tobias Swinden, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.A.</abbr>, late rector of Cuxton, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Enquiry Into the Nature and Place of Hell</i>, 2nd edition, 1727, has discovered that its locality is in the Sun. The accurate map he gives of that luminary renders it highly probable that the red flames so well observed and photographed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> De La Rue during a recent total eclipse have a <em>real</em> existence.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My friend, John Elliott Drinkwater, afterwards Bethune. <a href="chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parliament is ordinarily dissolved by Proclamation, after having been previously prorogued. However, there is at least one modern instance to justify the historical consistency of the text, namely, that which occurred on the 10th June, 1818, when the Prince Regent, afterwards George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, dissolved the Parliament in person. The Dramatist cannot therefore be properly accused of drawing heedlessly upon his imagination, though even had he thus far transgressed the boundaries of historical truth, Horace’s maxim might have been pleaded in excuse:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Pictoribus atque Poetis</i></span>
							<br/>
							<span><i xml:lang="la">Quidlibet audendi semper fuit æqua potestas.</i>”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Member for South Lancashire. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Afterwards Lord Sydenham. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Monk. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="it">Conte <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Alessandro Saluzzo di Monesiglio, Grande di Corona, <abbr>Presid.</abbr> della sexiare dell’ interno nel consiglio di stato</span>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="it">Saluzzo di Monesiglio, <abbr>Car.</abbr> Cesare, Luogoten, <abbr>Gen.</abbr>, Gran Mastro d’Artiglieria et Governatore de Reali Principi</span>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; the younger brother of the Count Alexander. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="fr">déjeûné</i> at Wimbledon Park, the residence of the late Duke of Somerset. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Syrian question. <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The dimensions were 2 <abbr>ft.</abbr> 8 <abbr>in.</abbr> by 2 <abbr>ft.</abbr> 2 <abbr class="eoc">in.</abbr> <a href="chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A gallery, elevated about seven feet, in the centre of each division of the new National Gallery, might be used either for a light railway, or for additional means of seeing the pictures on the walls. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The distance of the most eastern cab on the stand in Dorset Street from the spot in Paddington Street, on which cabs might stand without being opposite any houses, is in reality less than 140 yards. I am not aware of any two cabstands placed so near each other as those in question. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Toss up a bishop. <a href="chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The larger the piece of glass to be punched the more certainly the process succeeds. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. J.</abbr> MacLean, Fellow <abbr>Trin. Coll.</abbr>, Dublin. <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have adopted in the text that view of the nature of miracles which prevailed many years ago. In 1838, I published, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Bridgewater Treatise</i>, my own views on those important subjects⁠—the nature of miracles and of prophecy. Those opinions have been received and adopted by many of the most profound thinkers of very different religious opinions. See <a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-miracles">Appendix, Note A</a>. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <a href="appendix.xhtml#appendix-religion">Appendix, Note B</a>. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A <em>clever fellow</em> may occasionally snatch our applause; but a <em>clever man</em> can alone command our respect. <a href="chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Author of the celebrated Treatise <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Entity of Space</i>, the basis of all <em>sound</em> metaphysical reasoning. <a href="chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 225. 1829. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I afterwards succeeded in getting the British Association to adopt the plan of having an exhibition of specimens of the various manufactures and commercial products of the districts it successively visited. This commenced at Newcastle in 1838, and was carried to a much greater extent in the following year at Birmingham. I am not aware that this fact was ever referred to by those who got up the Exhibition of 1851. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have reason to believe, from the Note Book of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Drinkwater (Bethune), that this meeting was held on Wednesday, 26th June, 1833. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Economy of Manufactures</i>. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Turin. <a href="chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In this inquiry I profited by the assistance of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Head, now the Right <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Sir Edmund Head, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">K.C.B.</abbr>, late Governor-General of Canada. An abstract of my own observations was printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Abstracts of Proceedings</i> of the Geological Society, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 72. My friend’s historical views were printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Transactions of the Antiquarian Society</i>. <a href="chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“May this book soon give rise to many flourishing life assurance companies in our beloved fatherland, by which proportionate wealth and happiness may be promoted amongst us, and at the same time prepare for the decline of lotteries.”</p>
						<cite>German translation of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Babbage on Life Assurance</i>.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It had been my good fortune to have an opportunity of rendering justice to the merits of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scheütz, the inventor of the Swedish Difference Engine. <a href="chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
