<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>List of Mr. Babbage’s Printed Papers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="list-of-mr-babbages-printed-papers" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">List of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage’s Printed Papers</h2>
			<p>Many applications having been made to the Author and to his Publishers, for detached Papers which he has from time to time printed, he takes this opportunity of giving a list of those Papers, with references to the Works in which they may be found.</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>The Preface; jointly with Sir John Herschel.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Memoirs of the Analytical Society</i>. <abbr>4to.</abbr> Cambridge, 1813.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Continued Products</i>.⁠—<abbr class="eoc">Ibid.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">An Essay Towards the Calculus of Functions</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1815.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">An Essay Towards the Calculus of Functions</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1816. <abbr>P.</abbr> 179.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Demonstrations of Some of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Matthew Stewart’s General Theorems, to Which Is Added an Account of Some New Properties of the Circle</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Roy. Inst. Jour.</abbr></i> 1816. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 6.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Observations on the Analogy Which Subsists Between the Calculus of Functions and Other Branches of Analysis</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1817. <abbr>P.</abbr> 179.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Solution of Some Problems by Means of the Calculus of Functions</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Roy. Inst. Jour.</abbr></i> 1817. <abbr>P.</abbr> 371.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Note Respecting Elimination</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Roy. Inst. Jour.</abbr></i> 1817. <abbr>P.</abbr> 355.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">An Account of Euler’s Method of Solving a Problem Relating to the Knight’s Move at Chess</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Roy. Inst. Jour.</abbr></i> 1817. <abbr>P.</abbr> 72.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Some New Methods of Investigating the Sums of Several Classes of Infinite Series</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1819. <abbr>P.</abbr> 245.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Demonstration of a Theorem Relating to Prime Numbers</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Edin. Phil. Jour.</abbr></i> 1819. <abbr>P.</abbr> 46.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">An Examination of Some Questions Connected with Games of Chance</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans.</abbr> of <abbr>Roy.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr> of <abbr>Edin.</abbr></i> 1820. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 153.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Observations on the Notation Employed in the Calculus of Functions</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans.</abbr> of <abbr>Cam.</abbr> <abbr>Phil.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr></i> 1820. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 63.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Application of Analysis, <abbr>etc.</abbr> to the Discovery of Local Theorems and Porisms</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans.</abbr> of <abbr>Roy.</abbr> <abbr>Soc.</abbr> of <abbr>Edin.</abbr></i> <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 337. 1820.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Translation of the Differential and Integral Calculus of La Croix</i>, 1 <abbr>vol.</abbr> 1816.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Examples to the Differential and Integral Calculus</i>. 2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1820.</p>
					<p>The above two works were executed in conjunction with the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Peacock (Dean of Ely) and Sir John Herschel, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Examples of the Solution of Functional Equations</span>.” Extracted from the preceding. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1820.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Note Respecting the Application of Machinery to the Calculation of Mathematical Tables</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Memoirs of the <abbr>Astron. Soc.</abbr></i> June, 1822. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 309.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Letter to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Davy, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.R.S.</abbr>, on the Application of Machinery to the purpose of calculating and printing Mathematical Tables</i>. <abbr>4to.</abbr> July, 1822.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Theoretical Principles of the Machinery for Calculating Tables</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Brewster’s <abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 122. 1822.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Observations on the Application of Machinery to the Computations of Mathematical Tables</i>, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 1822.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Memoirs of <abbr>Astron. Soc.</abbr></i> 1824. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 311.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Determination of the General Term of a New Class of Infinite Series</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans. Cam. Phil. Soc.</abbr></i> 1824. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Observations on the Measurement of Heights by the Barometer</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Brewster’s <abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>, 1824. <abbr>P.</abbr> 85.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On a New Zenith Micrometer</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Mem. Astro. Soc.</abbr></i> March, 1825.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Account of the Repetition of <abbr>M.</abbr> Arago’s Experiments on the Magnetism Manifested by Various Substances During Rotation</i>. By <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Babbage, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> and Sir John Herschel.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1825. <abbr>P.</abbr> 467.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Diving Bell</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Ency. Metrop.</abbr></i> <abbr>4to.</abbr> 1826.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Electric and Magnetic Rotation</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1826. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 494.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On a Method of Expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> 1826. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Influence of Signs in Mathematical Reasoning</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans. Cam. Phil. Soc.</abbr></i> 1826. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Comparative View of the Different Institutions for the Assurance of Life</i>. 1 <abbr>vol.</abbr> <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1826. German Translation. Weimar, 1827.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On Notation</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edinburgh Encyclopedia</i>. <abbr>4to.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On Porisms</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edinburgh Encyclopedia</i>. <abbr>4to.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Table of the Logarithms of the Natural Numbers, from 1 to 108,000</i>. Stereotyped. 1 <abbr>vol.</abbr> <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1826.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Three editions on coloured paper, with the Preface and Instructions translated into German and Hungarian, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Chas.</abbr> Nagy, have been published at Pesth and Vienna. 1834.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Notice Respecting Some Errors Common to Many Tables of Logarithms</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Mem. Astron. Soc.</abbr></i> <abbr>4to.</abbr> 1827. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 65.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Evidence on Savings-Banks, before a Committee of the House of Commons, 1827.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On the Diving Bell</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Ency. Metrop.</abbr></i> <abbr>4to.</abbr> 1829.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. P.</abbr> Courtenay on the Proportion of Births of the two Sexes amongst Legitimate and Illegitimate Children.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Brewster’s <abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 85. 1829. This letter was translated into French and published by <abbr>M.</abbr> Villermé, Member of the Institute of France.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Account of the Great Congress of Philosophers at Berlin, on 18 Sept. 1828</span>.”⁠—Communicated by a Correspondent [<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. B.</abbr>]. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Journ.</abbr> of Science</i> by David Brewster. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 225. 1829.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Note on the Description of Mammalia</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>, 1829. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 187. Ferussac Bull, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 296.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, and on Some of Its Causes</i>. <abbr>4to.</abbr> and <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1830.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Sketch of the Philosophical Characters of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wollaston and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Davy</span>.” Extracted from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decline of Science</i>. 1830.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On the Proportion of Letters Occurring in Various Languages, in a Letter to <abbr>M.</abbr> Quételet</span>,” in a letter to <abbr>M.</abbr> Quételet.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Correspondence Mathematique et Physique</i>. <abbr>Tom.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 136.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Specimen of Logarithmic Tables</i>, printed with different coloured inks and on variously-coloured papers, in twenty-one volumes <abbr>8vo.</abbr> London. 1831.</p>
					<p>The object of this Work, of which <em>one single copy only</em> was printed, is to ascertain by experiment the tints of the paper and colours of the inks least fatiguing to the eye.</p>
					<p>One hundred and fifty-one variously-coloured papers were chosen, and the same two pages of my stereotype Table of Logarithms were printed upon them in inks of the following colours: light blue, dark blue, light green, dark green, olive, yellow, light red, dark red, purple, and black.</p>
					<p>Each of these twenty volumes contains papers of the same colour, numbered in the same order, and there are two volumes printed with each kind of ink.</p>
					<p>The twenty-first volume contains metallic printing of the same specimen in gold, silver, and copper, upon vellum and on variously-coloured papers.</p>
					<p>For the same purpose, about thirty-five copies of the complete table of logarithms were printed on thick drawing paper of various tints.</p>
					<p>An account of this work may be found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Journ.</abbr> of Science</i> (Brewster’s), 1832. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 144.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Economy of Manufactures and Machinery</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1832.</p>
					<p>There are many editions and also American reprints, and several Translations of this Work into German, French, Italian, Spanish, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter to Sir David Brewster, on the Advantage of a Collection of the Constants of Nature and Art.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Brewster’s <abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>. 1832. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 334. Reprinted by order of the British Association for the Promotion of Science. Cambridge, 1833. See also <abbr>pp.</abbr> 484, 490, “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association</span>.” Reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Compte Rendu des Traveaux du Congres Général de Statistique</i>, Bruxelles, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1853.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Barometrical Observations, Made at the Fall of the Staubbach</i>, by Sir John Herschel, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Babbage, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr>⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Brewster’s <abbr>Edin.</abbr> <abbr>Jour.</abbr> of Science</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 224. 1832.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Abstract of a Paper, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Observations on the Temple of Serapis, at Pozzuoli, Near Naples; with an Attempt to Explain the Causes of the Frequent Elevation and Depression of Large Portions of the Earth’s Surface in Remote Periods, and to Prove That Those Causes Continue in Action at the Present Time</i>. Read at Geological Society, 12 March, 1834. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Abstract of Proceedings of <abbr>Geol. Soc.</abbr></i> <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 72.</p>
					<p>This was the first <em>printed</em> publication of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage’s Geological Theory of the Isothermal Surfaces of the Earth.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Paper itself was published in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Geological <abbr>Soc.</abbr></i> 1846.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Reprint of the same, with Supplemental Conjectures on the Physical State of the Surface of the Moon. 1847.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Abraham Sharpe to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Crosthwait, Hoxton, 2 <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1721⁠–⁠22. Deciphered by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Flamsteed</i>, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Baily. Appendix, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 348, 390. 1835.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> May, 1837; Second Edition, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1838.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Some Impressions in Sandstone</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of Geological Society</i>. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 439. Ditto, <i><abbr>Phil. Mag.</abbr></i> <abbr>Ser.</abbr> 3. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 474. 1837.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Short Account of a Method by Which Engraving on Wood May Be Rendered More Useful for the Illustration and Description of Machinery</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Report of Meeting of British Association at Newcastle</i>. 1838. <abbr>P.</abbr> 154.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter to the Members of the British Association. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1839.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">General Plan, <abbr>No.</abbr> 25, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage’s Great Calculating or Analytical Engine</i>, lithographed at Paris. 24 by 36 inches. 1840.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Statement of the Circumstances Respecting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage’s Calculating Engines</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1843.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Note on the Boracio Acid Works in Tuscany</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Murray’s Handbook of Central Italy</i>. First Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 178. 1843.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On the Principles of Tools for Turning and Planing Metals</span>,” by Charles Babbage. Printed in the Appendix of <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> Holtzapffel Turning and Mechanical Manipulation. 1846.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On the Planet Neptune</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i>, 15th March, 1847.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Thoughts on the Principles of Taxation, with Reference to a Property Tax and Its Exceptions</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1848. Second Edition, 1851. Third Edition, 1852.</p>
					<p>An Italian translation of the first edition, with notes, was published at Turin, in 1851.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Note Respecting the Pink Projections from the Sun’s Disc Observed During the Total Solar Eclipse in 1851</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the <abbr>Astron. Soc.</abbr></i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 7.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Laws of Mechanical Notation</i>, with Lithographic Plate. Privately printed for distribution. <abbr>4to.</abbr> July, 1851.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Note respecting Lighthouses (Occulting Lights). <abbr>8vo.</abbr> <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1851.</p>
					<p>Communicated to the Trinity House, 30 <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1851.</p>
					<p>Reprinted in the Appendix to the Report on Lighthouses presented to the Senate of the United States, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1852.</p>
					<p>Reprinted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Mechanics’ Magazine</i>, and in various other periodicals and newspapers. 1852⁠–⁠3.</p>
					<p>It was reprinted in various parts of the Report of Commissioners appointed to examine into the state of Lighthouses. Parliamentary Paper. 1861.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Exposition of 1851; or, Views of the Industry, the Science, and the Government of England</i>. 6<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Second Edition, 1851.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Statistics of Lighthouses</i>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Compte Rendu des Traveaux du Congres Général</i>, Bruxelles, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1853.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A short description of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Babbage’s Ophthalmoscope is contained in the “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Report on the Ophthalmoscope</span>” by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Wharton Jones, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">F.R.S.</abbr>⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">British and Foreign Medical Review</i>. <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 1854. <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 551.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Secret or Cipher Writing. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr>’s Cipher Deciphered by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr></i>⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Jour. Soc.</abbr> Arts</i>, July, 1854, <abbr>p.</abbr> 707.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr>’s Second Inscrutable Cipher Deciphered by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr></i>⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Jour. Soc.</abbr> Arts</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 777, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 1854.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On Submarine Navigation</span>.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Illustrated News</i>, 23rd June, 1855.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter to the Editor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i>, on Occulting Lights for Lighthouses and Night Signals. Flashing Lights at Sebastopol. 16th July, 1855.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On a Method of Laying Guns in a Battery Without Exposing the Men to the Shot of the Enemy</span>.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Times</i>, 8 <abbr>Aug.</abbr>, 1855.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay" xml:lang="fr">Sur la Machine Suédoise de <abbr>M.</abbr> Scheutz pour Calculer les Tables Mathématiques</span>.” <abbr>4to.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">Comptes Rendus et l’Académie des Sciences</i>. Paris, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 8, 1855.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the Action of Ocean-Currents in the Formation of the Strata of the Earth</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Quarterly Journal Geological Society</i>, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1856.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>“<span epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Observations by Charles Babbage, on the Mechanical Notation of Scheutz’s Difference Engine, Prepared and Drawn Up by His Son, Major Henry Prevost Babbage, Addressed to the Institution of Civil Engineers</span>.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Minutes of Proceedings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 1856.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Statistics of the Clearing-House</i>. Reprinted from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Trans.</abbr> of Statistical <abbr>Soc.</abbr></i> <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1856.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations on Peerage for Life</i>. July, 1833. Reprinted, 1856.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations Addressed to the President and Fellows of the Royal Society on the Award of Their Medals for 1856</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Table of the Relative Frequency of Occurrence of the Causes of Breaking Plate-Glass Windows</i>.⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine"><abbr>Mech. Mag.</abbr></i> 24th <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1857.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On Remains of Human Art, Mixed with the Bones of Extinct Races of Animals</i>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of <abbr>Roy. Soc.</abbr></i> 26th May, 1859.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Passages from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of a Philosopher</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> 1864.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>[In the press]. History of the Analytical Engine. <abbr>4to.</abbr> It will contain Chapters <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, of the present Volume. Reprint of The Translation of General Menabrea’s Sketch of the Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage. From the <i xml:lang="fr">Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 82, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 1842. Translated by the late Countess of Lovelace, with extensive Notes by the Translator.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
