<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
			<p>Some men write their lives to save themselves from ennui, careless of the amount they inflict on their readers.</p>
			<p>Others write their personal history, lest some kind friend should survive them, and, in showing off his own talent, unwittingly show them up.</p>
			<p>Others, again, write their own life from a different motive⁠—from fear that the vampires of literature might make it their prey.</p>
			<p>I have frequently had applications to write my life, both from my countrymen and from foreigners. Some caterers for the public offered to pay me for it. Others required that I should pay them for its insertion; others offered to insert it without charge. One proposed to give me a quarter of a column gratis, and as many additional lines of eloge as I chose to write and pay for at ten-pence per line. To many of these I sent a list of my works, with the remark that they formed the best life of an author; but nobody cared to insert them.</p>
			<p>I have no desire to write my own biography, as long as I have strength and means to do better work.</p>
			<p>The remarkable circumstances attending those Calculating Machines, on which I have spent so large a portion of my life, make me wish to place on record some account of their past history. As, however, such a work would be utterly uninteresting to the greater part of my countrymen, I thought it might be rendered less unpalatable by relating some of my experience amongst various classes of society, widely differing from each other, in which I have occasionally mixed.</p>
			<p>This volume does not aspire to the name of an autobiography. It relates a variety of isolated circumstances in which I have taken part⁠—some of them arranged in the order of time, and others grouped together in separate chapters, from similarity of subject.</p>
			<p>The selection has been made in some cases from the importance of the matter. In others, from the celebrity of the persons concerned; whilst several of them furnish interesting illustrations of human character.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
